Paul has finalised his MEng Degree in the Department of Computing,
Imperial College London. He has obtained a First Class Honours Degree
and has been a member of the Engineering Dean's List (top 10% of
graduates) from 2010 to 2012 obtaining a number of prizes for good
academic results including the Deutsche Bank Prize for best "Topics in
Artificial Intelligence" and the "Morgan Stanley IT Prize" for
outstanding autumn examinations results in 2010.

Throughout his studies Paul has shown great interest in the area of
Computer Architecture, both through his course options (including
advanced courses such as Custom Computing and Advanced Computer
Architecture) but also by taking part in a research project with the
Custom Computing Group to improve the performance of an image
registration algorithm by using a novel dataflow architecture. He has
then went on an 6 months industrial placement at Maxeler Technologies
an exciting start-up in dataflow computing, to further his
understanding of the area. During his last two years at Imperial, Paul
has worked as an Undergraduate Teaching Assistant, conducting weekly
tutorial sessions on Logic, Reasoning about Programs and Discrete
Mathematics for a group first year students, marking weekly exercises
and discussing and revising lecture contents.

Paul is a member of the Imperial College Robotics and Shotokan Karate
societies for which he has taken part in competitions such as Eurobot
and BUCS. He has represented Imperial College at prestigious
programming contests such as the Northwestern European Regional
Contest and as a result of his experience has joined a group at
Imperial College that aims to prepare students for competitive
programming, teaching crucial algorithm skills and developing an
online teaching and training platform for 1st and 2nd year students.
He will be joining the Custom Computing Research Group at Imperial
College for a PhD in October 2013.
