\section{Conclusion}

In this paper we present an automated design flow for design space
exploration of dataflow designs based on a novel language, MaxC, and
aspect-driven compilation. We show that this approach meets the
initial performance, portability, integration and productivity
requirements. We implement a high performance dataflow design for RTM
to show that we can achieve significant speedups over software only
versions by exploiting the run-time reconfiguration. The automated
aspect-driven optimisation process improves productivity and design
portability, allowing optimisations strategies to be automatically
adapted to various platforms.  Finally we show that MaxC is a concise
language and that maintaining compatibility with C99 simplifies the
translation of existing applications.

Future work includes extending our approach by introducing new system
aspects that guide the translation and optimisation process from
existing C applications to dataflow designs. This includes the
development of system aspects that can be used to explore structural
transformations of the original application that improve parallelism
and computation versus communication ratio. The introduction of these
aspects could lead to a transparent design flow, that does not require
manual development of dataflow designs, greatly simplifying the
translation of existing software applications to high-performance
custom designs.
