\section{Evaluation}

\subsection{RTM Implementation}
We evaluate the proposed approach by implementing a high-performance
application based on the Reverse Time Migration method for seismic
imaging which is used to detect geological structures, based on the
Earth's response to injected acoustic waves. The technique models the
propagation of injected waves using the isotropic acoustic wave
equation \cite{araya2011assessing}:
\begin{align}
\frac{d^2p(r,t)}{dt^2} + {dvv(r)}^2\bigtriangledown^2p(r,t) = f(r,t)
\end{align}
We approximate the differential equation using stencil computation to
perform a fifth-order Taylor expansion in space and first-order Taylor
expansion in time.

We use MaxC to implement the dataflow kernels and aspects to generate
multiple configurations for the design by creating two kernels that
are used to control the memory command read and write streams
(CmdRead, CmdWrite) and the computation kernel (RTM). Table
\ref{table:loc} compares the number of lines of code, person-months
and development cost required to implement the kernels in MaxC and
MaxJ, based on the basic COCOMO model\cite{boehm1984software}. The
25\% reduction in code size results from removing the Java boilerplate
code (import statements, class definitions etc) and simplifying
computation, stream offset expressions and some commonly used API
calls (e.g. for creating counters).

\begin{table}[!h]
  \renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.3}
  \centering
  \caption{Measures based on the COCOMO model for the RTM kernels comparing the MaxC and MaxJ
    implementation. Generated using David A. Wheeler's 'SLOCCount'.}
  \label{table:loc}
  \begin{tabular}{c|ccc|ccc}
    \hline
    \multirow{2}{*}{\bf{Kernel}} & \multicolumn{3}{c|}{\bf{MaxC}} & \multicolumn{3}{c}{\bf{MaxJ}}                       \\
    \                            & \bf{LOC}                       & \bf{PM} & \bf{Cost} & \bf{LOC} & \bf{PM} & \bf{Cost} \\
    \hline \hline
    CmdRead                      & 26                             & 0.05    & 585       & 39       & 0.08    & 896       \\
    CmdWrite                     & 28                             & 0.06    & 633       & 47       & 0.10    & 1090      \\
    RTM Static                   & 246                            & 0.55    & 6916      & 303      & 0.36    & 4100      \\
    RTM RTR                      & 377                            & 0.83    & 9393      & 469      & 1.05    & 12812     \\
  \end{tabular}
\end{table}


\subsection{Results}

Results of the design space exploration using the word length aspect
illustrate the trade-offs between accuracy and resource usage as shown
in Figure \ref{fig:precision}. We observe irregular, large variations
when decreasing the mantissa from 18 to 16 and 24 to 22. These
non-linear differences are counter-intuitive, halving the number of
required DSPs and increasing the LUT and FF usage by only 30\%, with
little relative impact on accuracy. This is the effect of the backend
tools implementing arithmetic operations using a combination of both
DSPs and LUT/FF elements. The mantissa boundaries at which this
optimization occurs are platform specific, depending on the
architecture of the DSPs. Hence automating this optimization via
aspects and decoupling it from the original source code makes the
application more portable and facilitates discovery of interesting
trade-off opportunities using design space exploration.

\begin{figure}[!h]
\includegraphics[scale=0.7]{figs/pre}
\caption{Exploration of accuracy vs resource usage trade-offs.}
\label{fig:precision}
\end{figure}

\begin{comment}
\begin{table}[!h]
  %  \renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.1}
  \centering
  \caption{Results of varying the word length.}
  \label{table:aspect-wl}
  \begin{tabular}{ p{1cm} p{1cm} p{1cm} p{1cm} p{1cm}  p{1cm} }
    Word Width & LUT               & FF                & BRAM           & DSP             & Relative Error \\ \hline
    8, 24      & 106033  (35.63\%) & 143508  (24.11\%) & 295  (27.73\%) & 702  (34.82\%)  & \TODO          \\
    8, 22      & 133973  (45.02\%) & 185520  (31.17\%) & 295  (27.73\%) & 306  (15.18\%)  & \TODO          \\
    8, 20      & 129581  (43.54\%) & 178333  (29.96\%) & 289  (27.16\%) & 306  (15.18\%)  & \TODO          \\
    8, 18      & 121439  (40.81\%) & 170721  (28.68\%) & 286  (26.88\%) & 306  (15.18\%)  & \TODO          \\
    8, 16      & 117904  (39.62\%) & 157359  (26.44\%) & 283  (26.60\%) & 204  (10.12\%)  & \TODO          \\
  \end{tabular}
\end{table}
\end{comment}


The DSP aspect allows to explore the resource trade-offs of
implementing arithmetic operations in either DSPs or LUTs and FFs as
shown in Figure \ref{fig:arith}. This can help avoiding over mapping
on DSPs for arithmetic intensive applications.

\begin{figure}[!h]
\includegraphics[scale=0.7]{figs/arith}
\caption{Exploration of DSP and LUT/FF balancing for arithmetic
  operations.}
\label{fig:arith}
\end{figure}

Design space exploration using the parallelism aspect can be used to
investigate design scalability. Figure \ref{fig:scalability} shows
that performance scales linearly with the number of parallel
pipelines. This also shows that significant speedups can be obtained
by the MaxC dataflow design compared to the CPU only
implementation. Depending on the problem size, our approach can be
used to achieve a significant speedup over software only versions
which is comparable with the best published FPGA results for static
designs \cite{Xinyu:Qiwei:Luk:Qiang:Pell:2012},
\cite{araya2011assessing}.



\pgfplotsset{every axis x label/.style={
  at={(0.5,0)},
  below,
  yshift=-5pt}}

\pgfplotsset{every axis y label/.style={
  at={(0,0.5)},
  xshift=-20pt,
  rotate=90}}

\begin{figure}[!h]
  \centering
  \begin{tikzpicture}
    \selectcolormodel{gray}
    \begin{axis}[
        xmin=1,
        ymin=1,
        %no markers,
        font=\tiny,
        xlabel=Pipes,
        ylabel=Speedup,
        xtick={1,2,3,6,12},
        ytick={4, 10, 20, 40, 50, 70, 80, 100},
        legend columns=2,
        legend entries={
          Static (S),
          RTR (S),
          Static (M),
          RTR (M),
          Static (L),
          RTR (L)},
        legend style={
          draw=none,
          at={(0.05,0.85) },
          anchor=west
        }
      ]

      \addplot[mark=none] coordinates {
        (1, 3.2)
        (2, 6.53)
        (3, 9.8)
        (6, 19.6)
        (12, 39.2)
      };
      \addplot[mark=*] coordinates {
        (1, 6.75)
        (2, 13.5)
        (3, 20.25)
        (6, 40.5)
        (12, 81)
      };
      \addplot[dotted] coordinates {
        (1, 3.13)
        (2, 6.26)
        (3, 9.4)
        (6, 18.8)
        (12, 37.6)
      };
      \addplot[mark=*, dotted] coordinates {
        (1, 4.75)
        (2, 9.51)
        (3, 14.27)
        (6, 28.5)
        (12, 57.1)
      };
      \addplot[mark=none, dashed] coordinates {
        (1, 8.5)
        (2, 17.13)
        (3, 25.7)
        (6, 51.4)
        (12, 102.8)
      };
      \addplot[mark=*, dashed] coordinates {
        (1, 4.25)
        (2, 8.48)
        (3, 12.725)
        (6, 25.42)
        (12, 50.9)
      };2
    \end{axis}
  \end{tikzpicture}
  \caption{Scalability of the MaxC dataflow design -- performance
    increases linearly with the number of parallel pipelines.}
  \label{fig:scalability}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:scalability} shows the performance benefits of the RTM
implementation that uses run-time reconfiguration. This is generated
by using the reconfiguration aspect to create two configurations for
the RTM MaxC kernel. Since during the first half of the execution the
backward propagation and imaging functions are idle, the first
configuration requires only half the resources. This allows doubling
the number of parallel pipelines and halves the execution time of the
first configuration. The speedup obtained is comparable to
\cite{Xinyu:Qiwei:Luk:Qiang:Pell:2012}, but the partitioning and
optimization exploration process is automated via aspects, which
increases developer productivity. The automated process improves
portability of the design, allowing optimisations based on design
space exploration to be carried out on various platforms without
manual intervention.